already under Relentless Israeli
bombardment for months Palestinians in
Northern Gaza are also going hungry the
UN food agency has halted Aid deliveries
saying civil order has collapsed so how
can Israel be stopped from using
starvation as a weapon of War this is
Inside
[Music]
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Muhammad jamj the world food program is
suspending Aid deliveries to Northern
Gaza because it's too dangerous the UN
agency says the decision wasn't taken
lightly and it knows more people risk
dying of hunger but it's adamant
conditions need to improve and the
safety of its trucks and staff have to
be guaranteed the move leaves hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians facing
possible famine just how bad is the
situation in the north of the strip and
is Israel's offensive a war of
starvation this is what we'll be
discussing today but first this report
from Dimitri
medvedenko at the beginning of its war
on Gaza Israel cut off supplies of
everything Palestinians needed to
survive closing its two border crossings
and bombing Rafa The Crossing linking
Egypt to the
strip
we are imposing a Complete Siege on Gaza
there will be no electricity no food no
water no fuel everything will be closed
we are fighting against human animals
and we are acting
accordingly before October the 7th 500
trucks would enter Gaza daily most of
the population depended on humanitarian
assistance after a week of Relentless
bombing the Israeli Army issued an
evacuation order for Northern Gaza 1.1
million people had 24 hours to move to
the south of the strip for their own
safety it said many left but others
didn't in the months that followed even
those so-called safe zones came under
attack and some families made the
difficult decision to return home or to
what was left of it it was weeks into
its assault before Israel allowed the
first trucks back in and Far Below
pre-war
numbers the UN has repeatedly accused
Israel of blocking almost all a
deliveries to the north this year it
says only 10 of more than 60 planned
convoys have reached Northern
Gaza this is a rare day when one made it
through desperate for anything to eat
people rush
in why does a kilogram of rice cost $19
there's no flour we're eating animal
feed to stop ourselves from feeling
hungry people who used to have money at
the beginning of the war no longer have
any how can people eat or drink this is
a war of starvation in January the
international court of justice ordered
Israel to take immediate and effective
measures to enable the provision of
humanitarian assistance in Gaza but
Palestinians in the north say nothing
has changed hunger disease displacement
and non-stop Israeli attacks Demitri
medeno Al jazer for Inside Story
[Music]
so what's the significance of the wfp's
decision and it's a good question for
our guest today joining us from occupied
East Jerusalem is Shan Alo
Communications adviser for the Norwegian
Refugee Council in Palestine in ramala
in the occupied West Bank is nebal farak
spokesperson for the Palestinian red
crescent society which has delivered
essential services to Palestinians since
1969 and from London we're joined by
Sarah Pantano the chief executive of OD
di a respected humanitarian policy Think
Tank a warm welcome to you all and
thanks so much for joining us today on
Inside Story n let me start with you
today more than a million people used to
live in the north of the Gaza Strip now
the area is mostly destroyed for those
who chose to stay or for those who chose
to return just how difficult has life
become for them how desperate is the
situation and how dire is the suffering
AR is extremely dire we're talking about
almost 700,000 Palestinians who are now
in Gaza City and the north those people
are completely denied access to
humanitarian Aid We're talking about um
wfp seing seizing operation and
distributing Aid in Gaza City but we all
know that since the beginning of the war
in Gaza Israel has imposed PGE on Gaza
City and the North and this area is
nearly completely cut off a humanitarian
Aid that's why the situation
there is catastrophic people are
literally starving most people they
struggle even to have one meal most
essential supplies um are not available
at the market and even uh items which
are available are extremely high we're
talking about 10 20 times higher prices
than normal just having a one egg is
almost $2 I have here closely from from
our colleagues in jabalia north of Gaza
and they have been telling me how they
struggle every day in order to find food
for their families Shaina uh you heard
nebal there talk about how the situation
is catastrophic now the wfp previously
warned of famine like conditions
affecting 2.3 million people in Gaza
they said that its teams witnessed
unprecedented levels of desperation in
the north just recently now how bad from
what you're hearing is the situation and
how fearful are you and your teams of
how much worse it could
get you know we're hearing similar
reports about the cost of food just
simply being astronomical if it even can
be found we have some colleagues who
also remain in Northern Gaza and Gaza
City uh and they have run out of flow
they've run out of corn they're running
out of animal fodder they don't have any
cooking oil really they are struggling
to survive we've uh seen that the wfp
reported that uh around 16% of children
under the age of two are suffering from
acute malnutrition in Northern Gaza this
is only going to to rise as as Aid
convoys cannot access Gaza because it
simply isn't safe these are unbelievable
conditions for humanitarians to be
trying to work in and imagine if it's
this difficult for humanitarians how
difficult it is also for the civilian
population that's struggling to survive
yeah and Shaina you were talking there
about logistics and I wanted to follow
up with you about that because there are
so many Aid agencies who have complained
about the cumbersome Israeli procedures
that slow these Aid trucks from getting
into Gaza that slow the flow of aid from
getting into Gaza I want to ask you
about specifically how difficult it is
getting the aid in not just that but
also once the aid is actually in and
it's not a huge that's getting in but
once it actually is in how difficult it
is for those Aid agencies to actually
pick up the aid and then distribute the
aid well first of all Israel has
implemented these extremely cumbersome
screening processes which delay Aid it's
been difficult to track Aid when it's
coming in be able to anticipate it we've
also seen recently that Israel has been
targeting uh Aid convoys uh or the
police officers rather who are
accompanying Aid convoys which has led
to the police no longer being willing to
provide that service meaning that that
convoys are being uh mobbed by by
desperate Palestinians struggling to get
anything so uh when when trucks are are
managing to get into Gaza having them
travel from Rafa all the way in the
South up to Northern Gaza it's very very
difficult for for convoys to be able to
make that journey and arrive to their
destination with the aid that with the
the the complete package of of Aid
because so much of it is being uh looted
along the way or or being forced to be
distributed to people who are in
desperate need and struggling themselves
we desperately need in addition to the
massive scaling up of Aid the reduction
of these cumbersome screening processes
we need additional access points
including from the north from Aras from
the carne Crossing we need additional
ways to be getting Aid in so that it
reaches people uh more efficiently and
can reach those throughout all of Gaza
all of whom are in desperate need but
particularly those in Northern Gaza
Sarah so the world food program is now
saying that it's halting food deliveries
to Northern Gaza because conditions are
too dangerous obviously this is of huge
significance when it comes to the impact
it will have on people in Northern Gaza
getting that hugely needed Aid I mean
the wfp is essentially the backbone for
food delivery in Gaza so if they are
pausing their distribution what does
this mean going forward and can we
expect to see other Aid agencies
essentially taking the same decision in
the near
term yeah that is a very real you know
danger that all humanitarian supplies of
Northern Gaza will stop and this is in
the context of a situation that as my
colleagues were just describing is is
desperate you know we are seeing you
know suffering that is unspeakable
throughout Gaza particularly in the
north where people have really been left
without you know um support um I have
very dear friends and colleagues who are
you know responding in these emergencies
people that worked in some of the worst
crises around the world from Sudan to
Yemen and they're telling me that what
they're seeing now and what they are
witnessing is something they've never
witnessed in the very long careers as
humanitarian um actors on around the
world just to add a few figures to what
my colleagues have already said wfp
talks about you know potential faming
but we know half a million gazin are
already in family like situation um and
that you know means that a lot of kids
are staring because a lot of the
population of Gaza is made of young
people is made of children we are seeing
you know blockages of convoys repeatedly
I mean the UN said that um from the 1 of
January to the middle of February 51% of
plant a deliveries to Northern Gaza were
denied access by Israeli authorities and
you know in the month of January only 10
10 of the 61 you know humanitarian Aid
missions that they had asked for were
allowed by Israel north of w Gaza and I
think that is really important to you
know stress because Israel as a Waring
party has an obligation to facilitate
humanitarian assistance you know to
allign humanitarian assistant into Gaza
actually they have an obligation as an
occupying power to supply civilians in
Gaza with Goods um and they are you know
failing this obligation to ensure
critical continuity of cenal services
and and you know sort of protect
civilians so actually when they they
can't um s of uphold this obligation
they must they absolutely Mass you know
according to international law allow
unimpeded flow of humanitarian Goods H
and what we're seeing instead is just a
trickling of you know the old track here
and there for 2.3 million
people nbal Sarah was talking there
about the risk of famine that is now
being detected in Gaza also talking
about the responsibility that an
occupying Force has when it comes to the
delivery of Aid now I want to ask you
about the fact that the Palestinian red
crescent has been warning that a number
of people have died as a result of
Israel's deliberate starvation and
famine in Gaza so I want to ask you is
what we are seeing right now War by
starvation and are Israel's actions in
Gaza causing a
famine almost quarter of population in
Gaza are literally starving and the rest
of the population are uh all of them uh
suffer from uh insecure uh s insecure
access to food food insecurity is
something that every single Palestinian
in Gaza now suffer from old people are
suffer to have food water and even
medicine and um I also stress out the
importance of Israel as an occupying
power have a responsibility to fulfill
the needs of civilians in God
although and despite this Israel is
using the humanitarian Aid as a weapon
against Palestinians as a collective
punishment to let the entire population
starve and we have been seen uh people
are literally starving uh I'll tell you
uh regarding uh our experience and our
medical
post which we have established in
jabalia north of Gaza according to our
volunteers there they are telling us the
medical post is receiving many cases for
children who suffer from severe
malnutrition and those uh children um
are literally starving because they
don't have access to food many of them
as well uh start getting infectuous
diseases hepatitis A according to the
figures at least
700,000 Palestinians in Gaza Strip uh Co
uh in contagious diseases such as
respiratory diseases skin diseases and
other diseases the situation is
extremely dangerous and Palestinians if
they don't lose their lives directly
because of the bombardments they will
because of starvation and infectuous
diseases the level of starvation
particularly in Gaza City and the north
has reached a very dangerous stage Sarah
I want to come back to you about a point
you were making about the obligation
under International humanitarian law
when it comes to occupying forces when
it comes to the delivery of Aid you know
in January the international court of
justice ordered Israel to take immediate
and effective measures to enable the
provision of humanitarian assistance in
Gaza but the Palestinians in the North
in Gaza say nothing has changed that
things have only gotten worse Aid
agencies say the same the framework for
international humanitarian law it's
being challenged in ways now that it has
not been challenged before isn't that
correct it is sadly really correct and
and very dangerous because you know what
we have seen over the past few months
since the attack by Hamas on the 7th of
of October um is a flatting of
international militarian law at a level
unseen before I mean obviously Hamas
attack was unconscionable but you know
reciprocal crimes against humanity
cannot be accept as a proxy you know the
laws of war exist to preserve Humanity
in the midst of fighting you know
they're there really to give us a moral
compass to to to limit the suffering of
civilians and and you know the parties
are required to exercise restraint and
abide by you know the Geneva conventions
and just you know to explain what this
means um it is that the parties need to
exercise a distinction between civilians
and Military targets they need to use
doe precaution um to prevent harm to
civilians they need to make sure that
the damage to civilians is proportionate
compared to any you know anticipated
military Advantage gained I would argue
that Israel is failing all of these test
and you know it's failed them so far is
continued to fail them as people saying
the icj interim ruling hasn't really you
know changed anything now even if Israel
is acting in
self-defense you know even if Hamas you
know continues to hold hostages and
commit criminal actions this cannot be
used to justify what is really the
collective punishment of 2 3 million
Palestinians in Gaza you know the
majority of bumer children as I've
already said you know it can be
justified it can be used to justify
forcible transfer of Civilian population
bombardment of Civilian localities All
You know the failure of of of providing
humanitarian relief all things that are
you know a violation materal laws and
and I would also add that the failure um
of other states of third party states to
prevent these violations is basically
complicity we seeing Western democracy
they are violating themselves some of
the most fundamental commits to
international law and human rights law
sha I saw you reacting to a lot of what
Sarah was saying there and it looked to
me like you wanted to jump in so I'm
going to let you go
ahead no I mean Sarah's absolutely right
that that we're seeing starvation being
used as a weapon of war and that Israel
has completely
um completely uh ignored uh evaded
denied its respons responsibility
towards the occupied population it was
Israel remember who who uh within the
first day or two of this war declared
that they would cut off all electricity
water uh and fuel supplies and and it's
and we saw that the the international
court of justice reaffirmed Israel's
role and responsibility as the occupying
power to provide for the basic
necessities of of the of the protected
population in this case the Palestinians
in Gaza I think what we're concerned
about as we see um starvation levels
grow particularly in Northern Gaza is
that this is just another uh coercive
measure that Israel is taking to to
depopulate Northern Gaza to forcibly
transfer in violation of international
humanitarian law the the population
there and and force them really out uh
to to south of Wadi Gaza to the middle
area to hunis to Rafa or perhaps even
out to to Egypt as we've seen uh as as
this looming ground offensive uh or
ground operation in in Rafa um continues
to be to be uh previewed and so it's
it's essential that we continue to first
and foremost demand a ceasefire which
will of course allow for for conditions
that are better for and and appropriate
for humanitarians to be responding but
we also need the International Community
to put pressure on Israel to fulfill
these obligations under international
law and if they are not willing to
provide the basic needs uh for survival
of the protected population they at the
very least need to facilitate uh third
parties humanitarian agencies the UN in
in in fulfilling those obligations on
their
behalf nbal um I know we touched on this
a little bit earlier in the show but we
need to remember that the world food
program had only just resumed a delivery
to Northern Gaza after a 3-week
suspension that had taken place now
they're stopping yet again um they say
it's just simply too dangerous this
really underscores how dangerous things
are for civilians in the north too right
exactly civilians uh since the beginning
of the war have been denied access to
humanitarian Aid I um absolutely
understand how uh a humanitarian
agencies struggle to get the aid into
Gaza especially after uh many attempts
uh were faced by refusal from Israeli
authorities to allow the entry of a
humanitarian Aid and even the number of
humanitarian Aid trucks that are allowed
to go uh into Gaza City and the north
we're talking about just a few number of
a trucks that's why we have seen people
very desperate trying to jump into the
trucks and take anything they can take
because people only want to survive the
the L and the stage of dangerous of how
people are literally Starving in Gaza
City and the north it can't be imagined
we have said that repeatedly people
started even to Grand animals uh being
in order to have a flower uh to make a
bread the situation there is dire and we
also continue to confirm that the
situation generally speaking regarding
the humanitarian Aid Israel is the the
one who is obstructing the entry of a
humanitarian Aid into Gaza Strip before
the war on Gaza Gaza was receiving
around 500 a trucks daily today even
when both Crossings RAF and kerm Abu
Salam are open a maximum of
178 trucks are getting in that mean we
are far away from the number of a trucks
that should be allowed to be in so we
can fulfill the needs of people the a
trucks that are allowing to get in
doesn't even scratch the surface we're
talking about a fifth month of war in
Gaza there is many needs that is related
to the emergency situation we are in
which means we need to have relief items
in order to be provided for almost a 90%
of the population who became idps this
wasn't a need before the world this is
something that is in New and it's
related to the emergency situation and
instead of increasing the aid truck
we're getting less Aid trucks at least
if we take this into consideration in
addition to the increasing needs of
hospitals since they are dealing with
more injuries and they need more
supplies more medicines we need to have
double or triple trucks in order to fill
the needs of people on top of that have
access to all areas in G City and not
just to leave Gaza City and the north
completely denied access of a
humanitarian Aid and Sarah also just to
contextualize a bit more you're talking
about the fact that before October 7th
there were around 500 trucks of Aid per
day that would enter Gaza and even then
most of the population was dependent
upon humanitarian assistance so the fact
that Aid has massively decreased since
then only showcases how much worse the
situation is getting right just a few
weeks ago is the suspension of funding
to ARA which was you know know the
lifeline for so many Palestinians in in
Gaza and that practically has no you
know no money to continue to support
Palestinians so we can just you know
imagine how this is um aggravating a
situation that was already really you
know deeply um desperate for for so many
people on the ground um Shaina if I
could ask you um the fact of the matter
is we're talking about how as you said
more International pressure needs to be
applied and order to get more Aid into
Gaza but let me ask you this even if
there were more crossings that were
opened does that immediately make the
situation better or are there still a
lot of obstacles to overcome well of
course the situation needs more than
just the opening of Crossings we need
and and the scaling up of Aid uh the
amount of Devastation and destruction
throughout all of Gaza is going to take
years to to rebuild let alone of course
of course the the psychological trauma
that will I'm sure last for Generations
after all that the people of Gaza have
experienced over the last four and a
half months uh but but it is a first
step in terms of allowing for the entry
of more Goods the other thing on top of
of just having more entry points that
would make it easier to access uh all um
more areas of Gaza is that we need um
restrictions to be lifted in terms of
what can enter Gaza there have been
reports of of relief items um being
denied entry including things as simple
as tent poles or um toolkits to help uh
that are included in shelter kits to
help seal off um homes so we need those
restrictions to be lifted as well to
allow not only for a greater influx of
goods but a greater variety of goods
that are entering that can help and
support the relief effort that also
includes Machinery one of the major
issues right now that's also hampering
the the delivery of Aid is the lack of
even things as simple as forklifts to be
able to offload Aid into warehouses and
be able to to um take inventory and
figure out how to distribute it uh
things like fuel to be able to to get to
to different areas of Gaza and be able
to to distribute Aid um restoration of
telecommunications all of these things
are needed for to be a robust I'm sorry
to interrupt we just don't have a whole
lot of time left uh nbal I want to ask
you one last question we have just about
2 minutes left from your perspective
right now as dire as the situation is
what needs to happen right away in order
for the situation to
improve we continue to call on a
ceasefire we can't as a humanitarian
agencies operate under such horrific
conditions this world need to be end and
we need protection for civilians since
we're talking about 70% of the victims
are children and women we don't want
people just to die to die with full
stomach first we need them to be
protected and second we need h a safe
unembedded humanitarian Aid access into
Gaza through old borders and the new
points and we need also to be able to
distribute it in all areas in Gaza and
not still and to break the siege that is
impos since the beginning of the war on
Gaza on the area of Gaza City and the
north Gaza City and the North
700,000 people theirs are civilians and
they do have a right to have access to
food and water and we need this access
to be guaranteed we need also a safe
access for us as a humanitarians not to
be targeted while we are implementing
our life- saving missions trying to
elevate the suffering of people in Gaza
all right well we have run out of time
so we're going to have to leave the
conversation there thanks so much to all
of our guests Shane Alo nbal farak and
Sarah
Pantano and thank you too for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website eler.com and for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ Inside Story for me Muhammad jamj
and the whole team here bye for
now